Hi everyone, I'm Javier Luraschi, and today I'm super excited to talk to you about using
pins with JavaScript and Python. But why? Like, you're probably already aware that
R is a pretty great programming language for data science, so why should we care?
Well, let me show you something. There was a survey created by Stack Overflow that shows
that the top 5 programming languages that are the most popular are JavaScript, HTML
with CSS, SQL, Python, and Java. These happen to be the programming languages that basically
run the software in the world. Now, R is not there, it has 5.7% awareness
compared to 67.7% awareness of JavaScript. So the likelihood of you having to interoperate
with JavaScript or having to collaborate with someone that loves JavaScript or Python
or SQL is quite high. So how can we get R to interoperate with these programming languages
and for us as R data scientists to collaborate with others? And that's what I want to explore
in this talk. But let me give you some more context. Rather
than talking about technologies, let's talk about a fictitional team that is working on
something. And this team is composed by three members. The first one is data scientist Darla.
Many of you will feel familiar with her because she happens to love R. R is her main programming
language. She's very into data science and she's very competent with the tools she knows
and loves, like the tidyverse or tidymodels or even vase R or other packages from the
R community. There's one more character that we'll introduce,
which is Graphics Greg. Now, Graphics Greg comes from a background on design and he loves
using JavaScript. There's no way that Greg is going to learn how to use R. And that's
not necessarily bad. R is great for data science, but Greg loves doing static websites and helping
people with their design. So really the skills that he needs are CSS, HTML, and JavaScript,
and he's very competent with that. And there's one more person that perhaps exemplifies the
Python community, and this would be machine learning Monica. Monica likes to do machine
learning with things like network analysis and deep learning, and she happens to love
Python. She might be familiar with R, but really she's really into Python and it's really hard
to convince her to do otherwise. So the problem that we have at hand is a pretty
common problem, which is we live in a world where not everyone speaks the same language.
Not everyone speaks R. So let's try to solve this problem from the perspective of Darla,
which is our data scientist who loves R. What can Darla do to get us closer to collaborating
with Greg and Monica? So a lot of the times what Darla does on her day-to-day is analyzing
files and she has them in front of her. She has different files, perhaps we can call them
data frames, and she usually tidies them, analyzes them, shares them, and creates shiny
applications on R Markdown out of them. And it wouldn't be really acceptable for Darla
to ask Greg or Monica to have to learn R or to install R and R Studio to really collaborate
with her. So in her mind, what she's thinking is like, well, if I can share the basic building
block, which is the dataset that she's working on, if I could share that with Greg and Monica,
I have a better chance of convincing them of collaborating with me. So what she's going
on her mind is thinking, well, how can I share these data frames in technologies like GitHub
or Kaggle or R Studio Connect to kind of like help Greg and Monica reuse my datasets without
having to install R? And there's actually great news for many of you that are already
familiar with this particular problem, which is Darla, knowing that she's a competent
data scientist, knows that there's a package called Pins, which we've been developing in
the R community for the last year and a half, and allows her to do tasks like this, allows
her to retrieve data and upload data into the cloud. So what is the Pins package as
a quick recap? Well, first of all, the Pins package allows you to get a remote resource
into your local machine. So say if you have like a remote URL with a CSV file, you can
create a local cache on your machine very easily. Also, once you're connected to those
remote services like Kaggle or GitHub or R Studio Connect, you can also search those
services for datasets that are interesting to you, all within the Pins package. And last
but not least, and especially important for this particular problem that we're trying
to solve, is the Pins package allows you to share datasets in different cloud providers
like Google, Kaggle, Azure, and R Studio Connect. And you can do that quite easily. And this
is something that Darla is already familiar with. She knows that she can share datasets
with other colleagues that also use R and the Pins package. Now, how does this work?
The Pins package is actually quite simple. You install it from CRAN, you load the library,
and then you can ask it to pin a dataset, either an R object or a remote resource or
a local file into your local board, which is what we're doing in this particular example.
And then after you pin that resource locally, you can use your favorite tools to process
it. Like in this case, we're just reading a remote JSON file, saving it locally, and
then using JSON Lite to read it. Now, that's the simple use case of the Pins package to
bring things into your local machine. But you can also use the Pins package to push
things out of your local machine. And what Darla could do here potentially is register
a board, which is a concept from the Pins package. The board that she registers could
be GitHub, DigitalOcean, Google Cloud, RStudio, Kaggle, Azure, or AWS S3. And she can basically
push the dataset from something as simple of an array of 10 numbers by saying, pin one
to 10, name equals numbers, and then board equals, say, Google Cloud, whatever.
And the dataset that she has locally can be pushed to be shared to those particular services.
And if she needs to get it back at any point in time, she can just say, pin get, and the
dataset will come back from those services into her local machine again.
You can do a little bit more complex stuff. Like you can say, suppose that you're collaborating
in an image processing project and you have ImageNet, you can retrieve a smaller version
of ImageNet called TinyImageNet by saying, pin this remote resource locally into my local
machine and we'll call it ImageNet. And then what you can do is you can also say, oh, give
me back ImageNet, and now I want to push it to perhaps Kaggle, because maybe you did some
cleaning of the data or some processing. So all of these are tasks that the Pins package
supports, including finding. You can just say, pin find, and it will find the different
datasets that are available in the different boards.
So this is quite great. And if we think about it from Darla's point of view, we're pretty
close to the space that Greg and Monica are interested. We've moved our datasets from
our local machine to the cloud. But then again, we have the question that in this case, Nelson
Bigetti is asking and he's thinking, wait, this is a pretty great package for the R community.
Why can't we just do the same from JavaScript or Python? Rather than having to be downloading
random JSON files or CSV files and figuring out authentication and permissions, why can't
we just have the same code being used in Python or JavaScript? And sure enough, the whole
point of this talk is for me to introduce you to a new project, PinsJS, which is a reimplementation
of the PinsR package into JavaScript that supports Python as well. This enables you
to use pins from technologies like web browser with HTML or web applications running Node.js
or even Python. And the way that we accomplish this is basically by reimplementing the functionality
available on R in JavaScript. And this allows you to interoperate with R. So if someone
shares a dataset from R, you can then quite easily get the dataset from JavaScript or
Python, which is quite great, and even push datasets from Python and JavaScript back into
cloud service providers. So how does this look like? Well, here we have some HTML code.
It's quite simple. It's declaring that this particular HTML file needs the pins library
and also is running within the browser environment. And then we're basically just defining some
JavaScript callbacks to use pins. In this particular case, we are saying board register
to register a local board. And then we're creating a dataset, which the dataset is just
the number 42, and we're saving it in a local board. And then we're retrieving the value
and then we're printing it into the web page inside a div, which is our result. And we
can complicate this a little bit more. Rather than just creating one dataset, we can create
multiple datasets in JavaScript, say using a for loop from one to 10, we'll push those
datasets into the local board. And then we can search them and create perhaps a page
table on JavaScript that shows us all the different pins that we have stored, which
you can see on the top right. And we can even go a little bit step further.
If you're really into state-of-the-art JavaScript applications, you can use a library called
Babel, which allows you to transpile modern JavaScript into compatible JavaScript. And
you can make use of perhaps the new pipe operator to get the iris JSON file using pins and then
pipe it into the function that basically reads this dataset from JSON, and then creating
a data table with the entire iris dataset. And that's what we see on the top right.
So again, you're just using JavaScript to different degrees, using pins in the way that
you would expect to use JavaScript. And similar for Python, if you want to use pins from Python,
all you have to do is run pip install with a URL that is hosting the pins.js Python library.
And then you import the library with import pins, and then you create pins with pins pin
number 42, and then the board where you're storing this data into. You can also do things
like retrieving a pin, obviously, from either the local board or a remote board. And then
you can also find and to figure out which are the pins that are available to you, which
in this case is just the number that we just pinned on the iris dataset.
All right. So this gives us kind of like a pretty broad overview of how the pins package
works. But we want to see it in action on a real kind of like use case. So let's think
about this. Darla, Greg, and Monica get together over a lunch, and they're trying to figure
out which is the most important character of the last book in Game of Thrones. So, you
know, like they have some insight that perhaps, you know, like either Daenerys or maybe Tyrion
are the most important characters, but they can't really figure out exactly which one
is the most important one. So Darla, being the competent data scientist that we know
she is, she just after lunch, she gets back to her office and, you know, launches the
R instance and runs the pins library to find out if there's any interesting datasets on
the Kaggle service. And sure enough, she finds that Kaggle has at least three datasets, one
containing all the scripts from the HBO series, the other one, the subtitles, and the third
dataset contains the actual books from, you know, with all the dialogues and content from
Game of Thrones. So sure enough, this looks interesting. She uses pin get to get this
particular dataset and finds out that there's five books, five files, one for each book.
She loads the first book using pin get and the head of that particular file. And she
finds that sure enough, the file starts with a Game of Thrones book of one song of ice
and fire. Great. She has the data. So what she can do next is something that you're
pretty familiar with. She can use tools like deployer or tidy text or even string R with
regular expressions, whatever skills you already know and that you are learning about during
this conference. Basically, Darla makes use of those skills to transform the dataset from
raw text into a tidy table that contains the proper relationships between characters. She
finds out, for instance, that one of the first interactions is Adam Arbran with Jamie
Lannister and that with a weight of three. And maybe the way that Darla accomplished
this was by parsing each sentence and extracting the characters from each sentence and figuring
out just how they're connected. So yeah, sure enough, she creates a beautiful dataset,
which contains most of the interactions. And she reports back and tells Greg and Monica
is like, hey, I think that on the fifth book, there's a lot of relationships between Jon
Snow and also Tyrion and other characters. So check it out. And what she does is she
shares the dataset using pins by registering a board in the S3 AWS service. And she shares
this cleanup dataset with Greg and Monica. And what is great is that when Greg hears
the news, he's like super excited because Greg is not that much interested into doing
data science, but he's very interested in creating intuitive visualizations that can
really help us understand how data behaves. So she looks at Darla's dataset and just
runs to boot his Sublime Editor or Visual Studio Code or whatever he uses and loads
the pins package and then retrieves the dataset from S3. And as you can see, he's accomplishing
this with just two lines of code. He gets the data and then he loads it and he's good
to go. So then he thinks about it and he's like, well, maybe I can use Dtree, which is
a modern data visualization library available in JavaScript to kind of like create kind
of like a network visualization of how all the relationship of these characters looks
like. And sure enough, he uses his skill to create this particular graph, which looks
actually quite compelling and interesting. As you can see on this graph that graphic
Greg created, there's kind of like two major components. There's one component on the top
kind of like surrounding Jon Snow with other characters like Theon, Greg, Joy, and also
Stannis Baratheon. But there's also like another component of characters surrounding
Daenerys Targaryen, like Tyrion Lannister and Cersei. And it's interesting because this
is just like a different type of skills that is super great looking, intuitive, that anyone
can understand. Perhaps it's interactive and it really prompts other people to understand
this data set with the skills from Greg and Darla combined. And sure enough, like Monica
is also super excited about this. She looks at the data set and is like, wow, I really
need to get into this. But what goes on her mind is like, I really want to know exactly
who's the most important character. Is it Jon Snow or is it Daenerys? I want to know
with a numeric value, which is the most important character. And sure enough, with Pins, she
can now load the Pins library and retrieve this data set that Darla carefully created
and load it into her Python session and load the characters. And again, with three lines
of code, like she's ready to go. She can kind of like do some more analysis. And taking
the data set from Darla and the inspiration from Greg, it really pops on her head and
she figures out that maybe she shouldn't use some graph processing. So she loads the
NetworkX library, which can allow her to do graph processing over graph data sets. And
she basically uses a concept called degree of centrality, which, you know, the way that
she interprets this concept is like, if she can find the degree of centrality of this
particular graph of Game of Thrones characters, that could also imply which is the most central
character in the roles of the different in the different books that are available. And
sure enough, after running her script and doing some magic, she finds out that on the
first book, King Stark is the most important character. But on the fifth book, the race
between Jon Snow and Daenerys are pretty close. Jon Snow seems to be a bit of more of a central
character with a score of 0.19, while Daenerys Targaryen has score of 0.18. So again, you
know, she finds out that perhaps objectively Jon Snow is the most important character in
the entire season and the series, or at least on the last book. But honestly, more importantly,
what we just realized here is that we found out a way for three people with three different
technologies and three very different set of skills to collaborate together using technologies
that they all love and common libraries that they can reuse to better collaborate and tackle
bigger, more complex data science problems. So I'm really excited to see what you do with
this new library. If you need more information, please visit pinsjs.github.io. I want to say
that this is a community library that we've been developing, and it definitely needs the
help of the community to extend support for more boards beyond S3, local boards, and RStudio
Connect to, you know, boards like Kaggle and GitHub. And I also want to say thanks to people
that have been involved in this project, like Natalia Stefanova and Michael Calleghan. Thank
you so much for listening to this talk, and I hope that you are ready to start sharing
your datasets.